GC RSS and instruction work — draft progress, 2026-10-03

LATEST STATE
Draft rebased onto main 69de7f3526134fabb8ee5c87c23fe9ba71d4de69, including
the campaign's #11783 rooting fixes and #11785 API manifest repair.
Current implementation adds compact GC page metadata/object lists and sparse
page-directory shrink after full reclaim. Shape/header formats stay unchanged.
The prior visitor revision passed 4,835 macOS tests; the page-table revision
initially passed 4,846 with one capacity-test assertion failure. The test now
samples capacity after removals, isolating our helper from HashMap tombstones.
Latest-main macOS runtime: 4,849 passed, 0 failed, 5 ignored.
Consolidated Linux/application acceptance remains open. V2 isolated results
and the pool build-freshness correction are documented below.
Running isolated comparisons retain the original f6c873/ebc858 production base.
Those results cannot serve as final latest-main acceptance; a fresh baseline
and consolidated candidate comparison is required after them. Source hashes:
pages-source-and-validation.json (latest main), earlier manifests (frozen arms).


Objective
Minimize compiled-program peak RSS with Perry's GC while minimizing the
instructions required to retain those savings. Application correctness,
moving collection, FFI/events, idle/async behavior and retained/churn mixes
remain acceptance requirements. This draft does not establish an absolute
RSS minimum or a finished performance result.

Original measurement base
f6c873d99622d1bb751f198cfbd6cf3475251935, fetched from main on October 3.
The existing measured baseline is ebc858cb9806845998cee28decc666c3ea226fd2.
The intervening commit changes CI/test/docs files only. Crates, Cargo inputs
and toolchain inputs are identical (main-production-equivalence.json).

Implemented in this draft
1. MallocState's exact-pointer set has no backing allocation until activation.
   Preserve the existing initial/heavy growth headroom when it becomes active.
   The independent Linux allocator probe avoids 73,744 bytes initially and
   4,718,608 bytes for an inactive heavy registry. These are requested backing
   bytes, NOT measured application RSS savings. An active registry retains
   its full membership and headroom.
2. Remembered-set rebuilding drops snapshots of uniformly nursery/longlived
   blocks before iterating objects. Keep old, unknown and mixed ranges, plus
   the existing malloc-parent walk and global census block indices.
   Generation classification is essential: in-place promotion retags Eden
   old before transferring its blocks to OLD_ARENA. Filtering by arena owner
   alone was rejected during the audit. A new test exercises that window.
   Other tests compare the resulting remembered edges with the original
   whole-heap walk and require at least 40,000 avoided young-object visits.
3. Reuse the copying collector's exact already-noted shape-carrier predicate
   in the generic layout visitor. Skip a generation probe and a repeated
   carrier note only when both epoch flags already make that note a no-op.
   Continue enumerating the shape's keys edge and all other child slots.

4. Release complete interior pages of empty pooled blocks. The original
   madvise used a pointer guaranteed only 16-byte alignment and ignored errors.
   An isolated Linux probe demonstrates EINVAL and unchanged residency.
   Cache page size; preserve both boundary pages; use MADV_DONTNEED on Linux
   and aligned MADV_FREE elsewhere on Unix. Keep the allocation for reuse.
   The kernel test confirms three interior pages become nonresident, both
   neighbors retain sentinel data, and the mapping remains writable.
   Application RSS, page-fault and instruction tradeoffs still need measurement.

Validation so far
Current six-file runtime/test patch: 4,834 passed, 0 failed, 5 ignored on
macOS arm64, serial perry-runtime unit suite. Source hashes and log digest
are in source-and-validation.json. This includes the promotion-window test.
Earlier lazy-registry-only revision: Linux runtime 4,813 passed / 5 ignored;
FFI with runtime-link 75 passed; events 15 passed; compiler and both static
wrappers built together successfully. Those Linux results do not validate
the two subsequent scan optimizations. The scan revision's Linux suite aborted (exit 101) at
turnloop_pool::tests::a_full_pool_queue_refuses_rather_than_growing_without_bound:
"a saturated pool must refuse and fall back", then a destructor panic.
A queue saturation race is suspected but not yet established against baseline.
Do not count this run as a Linux pass. Linked checks and application A/B did
not run because the driver stopped at this failure.

Pool-release revision before visitor specialization: macOS 4,835 passed,
0 failed, 5 ignored; isolated Linux kernel helper 3 passed. Hashes and log
receipts are in pool-source-and-validation.json. Whole Linux validation of
this revision is pending. Earlier six-file hashes remain separately recorded.

Current measurements
Clean-main TypeScript, three fresh plain processes, full runtime/no auto:
peak RSS 257,863,680 / 257,892,352 / 257,994,752 bytes (about 246 MiB).
Total retired instructions about 65.75 billion. Two user-instruction sample
profiles attribute 73.72% / 73.64% of self samples to GC functions. This is
sampled instruction attribution, not an exact GC-only instruction counter
or a wall-time fraction. The separate trace reports 82 fulls and 6 minors;
all full triggers are old_gen_bytes. Fulls reclaim substantial garbage,
so raising thresholds to suppress them is not an established improvement.
Main costs: slot visitors/marking, retained-edge rebuild, pointer validation,
shape carrier notes, valid-pointer-set construction and sweep.

Heap attribution requested by the shape campaign — completed
campaign-attribution.json contains both repeated observations and hashes of
the raw reports on the build host. Requested/usable/resident bytes are kept
separate. These snapshots are NOT peak RSS and must not be added together.

TypeScript: third natural synchronous full, two matching census observations.
Live GC payload: 28.03 MiB; ObjectMeta: 64,734 records x 160 bytes = 9.88 MiB.
64,217 ordinary owners carry only common prototype/brand/flag facts. Their
observed facts form 117 groups and require no additional grouping beyond
existing shapes in this snapshot. This is evidence for the campaign's planned
migration, not proof of zero replacement storage or an achieved RSS saving.
Four accessor/descriptor summary fields reserve 32 bytes per meta: 1.98 MiB
across all records, but only 94 ordinary owners have any nonzero summary.
Only 17 records (2,720 gross bytes) exist solely for those summaries.

Shape storage: 6,849 records, 541 chunks, four directory pages, 355 extras,
945 ConstFn entries. Slabs plus extras request 1,164,656 bytes (1.11 MiB).
Empty record slots occupy 669,632 bytes. At the same chunk count, the 56->64
byte record growth costs 138,496 requested bytes; this is not an RSS delta.
Stock shape census omits 23,640 requested bytes of extras/ConstFn lists.
Native usable allocation: canonical indices 2.50 MiB, arena page tables
5 MiB, per-object slot-map 2.25 MiB, arena backing 108.375 MiB. Some capacity
is nonresident. Anonymous resident totals reconcile to smaps: 143.38/142.88
MiB in the separate native observations. Mixed-owner/free pages stay unassigned.

Zod: original 200-iteration workload has four minors and no natural full;
plain peak RSS is 30,330,880 / 30,474,240 / 30,400,512 bytes. Even a separate
2,000-iteration diagnostic reached no full. Therefore a distinct census-only
source calls gc() at iteration 100 BEFORE safeParse, keeping the schema live.
The original benchmark and primary measurements remain unchanged. Both
forced-census repeats match the original Node output. This boundary cannot
be interpreted as the original workload's natural GC behavior or peak RSS.
Live GC payload: 602,360 bytes; 277 ObjectMeta records: 44,320 bytes;
summary fields: 8,864 reserved bytes, three summary-only records: 480 bytes.
3,249 shapes plus directories/extras request 389,920 bytes. Canonical indices
use 0.375 MiB allocator capacity; native anonymous resident total is 12.6875
MiB in each diagnostic repeat. See the JSON for full ownership categories.

Failed measurement history remains available: the first TS hook at full #80
was never reached under GDB (77 fulls); successful stdout was not a census.
The original Zod natural-full driver exited 1 because no full existed; the
explicit diagnostic boundary is documented instead of silently relabeled.

Earlier experiments still relevant, held separately
The larger rss-header-20261002 experimental tree contains cold metadata,
header, arena and GC-policy experiments plus dynamic string accumulation.
An older combined experiment reduced TypeScript median RSS 237.45 -> 180.30
MiB and instructions about 80%, chiefly by reducing transient string
allocation (about 2.36 GB -> 75.6 MB cumulative arena allocation). These are
historical comparisons between those experimental arms, NOT gains proven
for this draft versus latest main. The broad tree is frozen pending isolation
and coordination; it is not a landable combined implementation. An eight-byte
TOTAL object header remains unimplemented and unproven.

Shape campaign boundary
The owner-approved order is #10498 prototype-in-shape first, compact header
later with coordinated codegen/ABI offsets. The campaign owns prototype,
brand/flag placement; accessors and descriptor summaries (#10498/#10871);
function descriptors (#10507); array named props/layout; closure/ConstFn
layout; canonical-key/reverse indices (#10753); and shape record layout.
This draft changes GC bookkeeping, traversal and empty-page release; it adds
no side table or shape format. Residual exotic/symbol/prototype table restructuring still requires
a concrete coordination proposal before implementation. No such rewrite is
underway. The existing exact shape no-op predicate is reused unchanged.

Queued work and remaining acceptance
- Triage Linux queue-test abort, then runtime/FFI/events and coherent build.
- Validate pooled-page release end to end, including page-fault/CPU tradeoffs.
- Three compiled rooting/old-to-young fixtures on baseline and candidate,
  default and stress modes. Stress must match Node output, copy objects and
  report protected retired from-space. A zero-moving run is not a pass.
- Normal-auto 17-case A/B, 3 RSS/CPU and 3 instruction/cycle measurements per
  case/arm (204 executions), exact complete stdout against Node 26.5.1.
- Use completed TS/Zod attribution to coordinate representation changes;
  inspect remaining allocation amplification and expensive GC callbacks.
- Competitors: latest npm ScriptC 0.2.1, Porffor alpha15 (72d048d73d49), and
  Static Hermes static_h ade4a2b20246 pinned. Porffor/Hermes refreshed runs
  complete. ScriptC retry with installed LLVM 22 is complete: six cases match
  Node in all three runs; JSON fails compilation with SC1043. Initial clang
  failures are retained. Competitor versions and per-case RSS/CPU medians are
  included beside this report. Final normal-auto Perry comparison pending.
- Preserve the strongest validated memory changes while measuring each
  instruction optimization. Review real-app tradeoffs and run CI gates
  before this draft is ready to merge. No merge is requested now.

Where Claude can inspect running evidence
Build host: perrymaster.skelpo.net, /root/rss-header-20261002.
Remote source: perry-gc-runtime-main (six-file v2 at the failed Linux run).
Current draft also includes the two-file pool revision; see its source manifest.
Frozen earlier products: gc-runtime-main; next products: gc-runtime-scan-main.
Drivers: campaign-v2-run.sh, comparator-scriptc-retry.sh,
gc-runtime-scan-v2-run.sh. They serialize on /root/.perry-heavy.lock.
The scan driver stopped at Linux tests; no v2 frozen products or A/B exist.
The pool driver is queued behind the shared lock but requires the absent v2
success receipt. It cannot provide validation until prerequisites are repaired.
Do not interpret its queued process as progress past the failed v2 tests.
State files: campaign-main-v2.exit, campaign-main-native-v2.exit,
comparator-scriptc-retry.exit, gc-runtime-scan-v2-build.exit,
gc-runtime-scan-v2-linked.exit, gc-runtime-scan-v2-auto.exit.
Absent exit files are not proof that a process is alive: inspect its PID.
The raw logs, source/binary hashes, harnesses and frozen experimental reports
are retained there; pool-stage source hashes match pool-source-and-validation.json; the current
visitor experiment is pinned by inline-source-and-validation.json.

Validation update: queue fixture repaired
The baseline and scan-revision queue test were byte-identical. Thirty fresh
isolated reruns of the original test passed, so the failure is intermittent.
The dependency removes jobs from the queue before entering work: first Busy
therefore does not prove the queue stays full until the fallback submission.
The fixture now holds exactly the configured workers, with acknowledgements
from those jobs, before filling the queue. All refusal, inline execution,
exactly-once delivery and drain assertions remain intact. No production pool
or GC code changed in this repair.
Linux scan revision plus this fixture: 4,816 passed, 0 failed, 5 ignored.
The original exit101 is retained; replacement logs use scan-v2r1. FFI/events,
coherent build, moving fixtures and normal-auto matrix follow in the existing
serialized driver. The invalid earlier pool-only waiter was stopped while
confirmed childless; the replacement scan-pool-resume driver runs scan then
pool stages in order, with unchanged source hashes for both production arms.
The pool revision with the fixture repair also passed macOS: 4,835 passed,
0 failed, 5 ignored. Linux scan-revision FFI passed all 75 tests.
See queue-fixture-validation.json for hashes and the original repeat results.

Visitor instruction experiment is included (macOS passed, Linux/A/B pending):
instantiate the existing shared visitor body for full marking and retained-old
parent rebuilding, removing per-slot indirect callbacks without changing the
slots visited. Compare instructions, code size and RSS before accepting it.
GC page-table compaction remains the next independent metadata candidate;
prototype/brand/flags, shape facts and canonical indices stay campaign-owned.

Visitor experiment validation plan
Current head adds two hot caller instantiations of the existing enumeration:
trace_heap_rewrite_slots and remember_retained_old_to_young_slots. No slot,
weak-edge rule, descriptor case, collection threshold or shape fact changes.
Its own macOS runtime suite passed 4,835 tests, 0 failed, 5 ignored.
Linux/application results are still pending for this visitor revision. Linux driver is queued behind the
scan/pool sequence and will stop if its predecessor fails.
The follow-up driver first compares frozen scan and pool arms on original
TS/Zod full-runtime programs (24 runs), including instructions, cycles and
minor/major faults. It then builds/tests the visitor revision coherently,
runs linked moving fixtures, compares pool versus visitor (24 diagnostic runs),
and runs the separate 17-case normal-auto A/B using verified pool binaries.
Both diagnostic comparisons record binary section sizes; more inlining may
trade fewer executed instructions for larger text, so it is not accepted as
an unconditional improvement before the measurements finish.
Drivers: gc-runtime-scan-pool-resume.sh and gc-runtime-inline-v4-run.sh.
New receipts: gc-runtime-scan-v2r1-build.exit,
gc-runtime-scan-pool-resume.exit, gc-runtime-inline-v4-run.exit.
Original failure and all preceding source manifests remain immutable.

GC page-table compaction
- Keep OldPageMeta's external snapshot unchanged; stored counters shrink from
  104 to 56 bytes per page. Dirty-slot work remains usize and epochs remain u64.
- Group 64 neighboring page facts in a chunk with explicit presence bits and
  release a chunk when its final page is removed. This avoids one hash bucket
  per page; old arena blocks register dense page ranges.
- Store in-page object starts as u16 byte offsets. One full entering address
  handles an object starting before the page, even when it spans gigabytes.
  Preserve insertion order, deduplication, partial-removal and promoted-run rules.
- Shrink sparse map capacity after full-cycle removals, with twofold retained
  headroom and fourfold sparsity admission. Collection thresholds are unchanged.
- Discover every page_meta Rust module in both source obligation audits. The
  former fixed list omitted sweep_tally; its existing flush-free writer rule
  is now explicit. Directory shrink need not expand described object runs.
Tests compare compact storage against independent maps/vectors through reuse,
missing pages, high addresses, boundary crossings, removals and wide epochs.
At the old TypeScript census, the two targeted tables requested 7,607,168 bytes.
That is the target, not a measured saving. Normal-auto and full-runtime A/B,
page-fault/code-size observations and repeated TS/Zod census remain required.
Isolated pre-rebase driver: gc-runtime-pages-v5-run.sh, source revision v5r1.
Latest-main tests: logs/gc-runtime-pages-main69-macos.log. The original failed
log gc-runtime-pages-v5-macos.log is retained; never relabel it as a pass.

Latest-main validation result
The complete current source on main69 passed the macOS runtime suite:
4,849 passed, 0 failed, 5 ignored. Source and log hashes are recorded in
pages-source-and-validation.json. This includes all new table tests and both
expanded obligation audits. No Rust inputs changed after that successful run.
Fresh-main source archive and separate candidate overlay are uploaded. The
main69 driver builds a pristine baseline and the consolidated candidate in
separate roots/targets, runs candidate runtime/FFI/events, linked moving checks,
24 full-runtime TS/Zod diagnostic runs and 204 normal-auto executions. It is
queued after the isolated older-base arms, whose results remain separately
identified. Final comparator join must use these fresh-main normal-auto results.
Source roots: perry-main69-base / perry-main69-gc (created only on admission).
Driver: gc-runtime-main69-run.sh; receipt: gc-runtime-main69-run.exit.

Executable attribution, existing frozen-main diagnostics (not main69 acceptance)
Added executable-footprint.json: hashes bind all four observations to the
previously validated full-runtime campaign binaries and their pre-observer
smaps files. Two TypeScript observations show 85.793 MiB of executable-backed
RSS, of which 70.770 MiB is in executable-permission mappings. Two Zod
observations show 14.109 MiB and 10.492 MiB respectively. TypeScript is at its
third natural full; Zod uses the separately labelled explicit-census workload.
These are collection-boundary snapshots, not peak/default-auto-build RSS.

TypeScript's .text is 109,252,738 bytes of ELF layout. One generated closure
is 8.266 MiB of machine code, two more are about 2.5 MiB each. Symbol sizes
do not establish which of their pages are resident. Constants, stack maps,
unwind information and relocated data occupy other mappings; the report
keeps those separate from executable-permission RSS. This is evidence for
a generated-code footprint audit after the current runtime comparisons, not
a lower bound or an estimate that heap compaction could save those bytes.
No codegen/header/shape changes are included in this attribution step.

Measurement acceptance preparation
The queued v3/v4/v5/main69 normal-auto matrices now measure minor and major
page faults on ALL 17 workloads, alongside instructions/cycles. This closes
a gap in the earlier plan, which observed fault costs only on full-runtime
TS/Zod. Plain RSS/CPU runs remain separate. The active v2 matrix is unchanged.
Before replacing the four queued scripts, verified the active v2 process and
that none of the four later matrix processes existed. Original scripts and
before/after hashes are retained (gc-auto-fault-events-revision.json).

Added summarize-gc-comparison.py: require a successful terminal matrix receipt,
all 204 unique cells (24 for no-auto), exact Node output independent of the
recorded correctness flag, consistent executable digests, successful matching
builds and current binary hashes. Summaries retain every repeat plus min,
median, max and signed changes for RSS, CPU, instructions, cycles and faults.
Missing/zero/nonfinite counters cannot silently become a passing zero. A zero
fault baseline retains its absolute change without an invented percentage.
check-gc-summary-verifier.py accepts three complete synthetic matrices and
rejects 12 corrupted inputs (including a build from the wrong workload). This verifies the summarizer, not applications.

Usage after a queued fault-enabled normal-auto matrix succeeds:
python3 summarize-gc-comparison.py /root/rss-header-20261002/gc-auto-main69 \
  --arms main69-base main69-gc --suite auto --fault-events \
  --complete /root/rss-header-20261002/gc-runtime-main69-auto.exit
Do not declare acceptance from an average across workloads: inspect each
case's RSS/instruction tradeoff and investigate regressions. The summarizer
deliberately makes no automatic performance-acceptance verdict.

COMPLETED: v2 normal-auto scan/bookkeeping comparison (old production base)
204/204 executions match Node. Successful terminal receipt, exact 17 x 2 x
2 x 3 cell coverage, build-to-workload bindings and current binary digests
were checked by the published summarizer. See scan-comparison.json.
This validates v2 only; page release/visitors/page compaction and main69
acceptance are still pending. The existing driver has advanced to v3 build.

RSS mostly unchanged; document replacement falls 145.062 -> 142.273 MiB
(-1.92%). TypeScript falls 244.598 -> 243.992 MiB (-0.25%), instructions
-1.82%. Large live-set instructions -2.74%; retain/release -1.66%.
Open regressions/tradeoffs: Zod RSS 24.215 -> 24.508 MiB (+1.21%); string
build instructions +0.53% (all three candidate counts exceed all baseline
counts). Do not call this an across-the-board win. TypeScript plain CPU
time +12.89% despite instructions -1.82% and median perf cycles -1.47%;
shared-host timings/cycles vary widely across several cases. Keep both
measurements and investigate; do not discard the slower CPU result.

Next: assess whether the visitor revision removes the string instruction
regression, and whether the consolidated memory changes improve Zod. If
not, isolate those costs before accepting the combined candidate. Quantify
the pool release's fault/CPU cost across all workloads and the page-table
census savings. No performance-acceptance verdict has been made.

BUILD-FRESHNESS CORRECTION (2026-10-03)
The original pool v3 build was stale: tar restored runtime inputs with mtimes
older than Cargo's dependency outputs. Cargo reported 4,816 passing tests in
0.36 seconds but omitted both new page-release tests. All three copied products
were byte-identical to v2. Its 50 partial application rows, linked checks and
successful build receipt are REJECTED as pool-revision evidence. Original logs,
binaries and terminal receipts remain preserved; no measurements were erased.
See gc-runtime-pool-v3-stale-build-rejection.json.

V2 remains independently supported: its runtime and static builds recompiled,
its added scan tests passed, and linked TS/Zod/string binaries contain the new
generation-filter calls absent from their baselines. See
 gc-auto-v2-build-freshness-proof.json. Existing v2 regressions remain open.

prepare-gc-overlay.py now refreshes every runtime Rust input timestamp after
verifying source contents, and invalidates outer auto-runtime cache stamps
while retaining backups. A tiny real Cargo reproduction demonstrates both
stale reuse and successful recompilation after the repair; see
check-gc-overlay-cargo-refresh.py and gc-overlay-cargo-refresh-selftest.json.
verify-gc-runtime-build.py rejects the stale production test log and requires
new tests, an actually rebuilt runtime, a changed static archive and a compiled
page-release symbol. Later page-table builds additionally require their new
tests. Normal-auto TS/string outputs also require the page-release symbol.
These guards supplement source hashes; source hashes alone were insufficient.

The repaired pool v3r1 runtime suite has now actually compiled and passed:
4,818 passed, 0 failed, 5 ignored, including both kernel/page-boundary tests;
75 runtime-linked FFI and 15 event tests passed (pool-retry-linux-validation.json).
Coherent archives and application acceptance
are still pending. Refreshed 1,494 source inputs and invalidated four outer
cache stamps; compact receipt: pool-retry-source-refresh.json.

Execution order is now a single serialized pipeline:
gc-runtime-mtime-repair-run.sh -> pool-v3r1 -> inline-v4r1 -> pages-v5r2 ->
main69r1. Repaired v3 uses gc-runtime-pool-r1-main / gc-auto-v3r1; invalid v3
products are never reused. Later source revisions are unchanged; the new
suffixes identify repaired execution. Full pipeline success requires all
runtime/FFI/events, linked moving checks and workload matrices to complete.
The final summary receipt is gc-runtime-main69r1-auto.exit (not the superseded
main69-auto receipt shown in the historical command above).

Pool retry advanced: the coherent compiler/runtime/stdlib build completed and
verify-gc-runtime-build.py accepted the changed archive plus decommit symbol
(pool-retry-artifact-verification.json / pool-retry-products.json). All three
linked fixtures passed in default and moving modes; copied-object counts were
12,442 / 5,689 / 63,625, with protected from-space. Compact observations are in
pool-retry-linux-validation.json. The guarded normal-auto matrix is now running;
RSS/instruction/fault tradeoffs remain unmeasured for this repaired revision.

NEXT INSTRUCTION ATTRIBUTION (queued; no result claimed)
After the full repaired pipeline succeeds, gc-final-instruction-profile.py
samples user instructions in the exact verified normal-auto symbol builds:
main69 baseline/candidate for TS, Zod and string-building, plus the older v2
baseline/candidate string case with its observed +0.53% instruction cost.
Two repeats per subject (16 runs), reversed order on repeat two. Source,
plain/symbol binary hashes and matching .text are checked against build records;
each input must have six correct matrix cells. Profile output must match Node.
Lost samples or missing attribution fail the report parser. These are self
samples, not elapsed time, peak RSS or exact per-function instruction deltas.
Inlining can move attribution between symbols, so compare the machine code
and aggregate collector work before inferring a regression's cause.

The parser was exercised on the actual 64,885-sample baseline TS report
(47,835 GC self samples, 3,111 arena self samples) and rejects lost samples,
empty attribution and missing event counts. This only validates report reading;
it does not establish that the queued final profiles have run. See
instruction-profile-plan.json for the pinned host harness dependencies.
Independent serialized follow-up: gc-final-instruction-profile-run.sh;
receipt gc-final-instruction-profile-v1.exit. It requires the whole preceding
pipeline to succeed and cannot silently profile a partial/failed build.
